---
layout: post
date: 2019-06-07
title: Journal 2019.20 - Clojure 1.10.1, jira migration
---

Hey all, I'm a little off rhythm as I've had some vacation time recently, but now is a good time to check in!

## Clojure 1.10.1

Today we released [Clojure 1.10.1](https://clojure.org/news/2019/06/06/clojure1-10-1), which is the same as 1.10.1-RC1. I've discussed the contents of this release in multiple past journals and don't have anything new to add - check out the release announcement and [changelog](https://github.com/clojure/clojure/blob/master/changes.md#changes-to-clojure-in-version-1101) for more details. If you're already using 1.10.0, 1.10.1 should be a low-risk update, but let us know if you have any issues.

## JIRA migration

The Clojure JIRA migration is essentially complete at this point. Issues are all moved. Old urls redirect to the new urls so in general all the old links are still good (all the links on the clojure web site have been updated though). Support issues can be created in the new [support portal](https://clojure.atlassian.net/servicedesk/customer/portal/1), which does not require a jira account or a CA and we will move them to the appropriate place. The Clojure web site area on contributions has been overhauled as well.

One thing we have long wanted to do is to separate the dev-side work in JIRA from enhancement requests for features etc. Almost every language has some system for this (PEP in Python, JEP in Java, etc). We're working on a new system for that, which may even be more expansive than just enhancements. The goal is to create a system where users can make requests, ask questions, vote, and where those things can be public, visible, and persistent with a process for moving items from there into JIRA for work. Anyhow, more to come on that.

## Odds and ends

Despite all the process and infrastructure work above, I've carved out some time to keep moving spec along, working on the new api for closed spec checking.

## Other stuff I enjoyed this week...

Probably my favorite thing I saw this week was the new [Stranger Things LEGO set](https://www.lego.com/en-us/campaigns/stranger-things#) and the accompanying video. Can't wait for Season 3!
